Hello.
Welcome to Maximizing
Java Virtual Machine Performance.
This session will be
given by three of us,
myself, Victor Hernandez,
and Roger Hoover from the
Java Virtual Machine team,
and also Christy Warren,
who is the responsible person
for responsiveness in Tiger.
So what we'll be talking about
is the Hotspot Virtual Machine in
Mac OS X that is used to actually
execute your Java applications.
This Hotspot
Java Virtual Machine comes from Sun,
and we take that source,
and we tailor it for Mac OS X and
optimize it specifically for PowerPC.
Currently, we are supporting J2SC 142,
and as announced yesterday,
we will be supporting J2SC 5.0.
Everywhere throughout this talk,
we'll be referring to it as Java 150,
which is what we all know it as,
but the official name is J2SC 5.0.
So what do you get with the Hotspot
Virtual Machine on Mac OS X?
You get a variety of features.
You get a client just-in-time compiler,
a variety of garbage
collection algorithms,
an implementation of class data sharing,
which was innovated by
Apple starting in Java 1.3.
You get native G5 support,
also a JDK whose classes are
optimized specifically for Mac OS X.
And finally, you get the debugger
and profiler interfaces,
JVMDI and PI,
which development tools can use
to analyze your application.
Uh-oh.
What's going on?
This thing is a little confused.
All right.
Sorry, I wasn't looking at the slides.
And now with 1.5,
there are a whole bunch of new features.
Specifically,
you will be getting new language
features in the Java language,
which will make your development
time a lot more-- basically,
it'll simplify a lot of development.
There's also a new client compiler
feature called SafePoint Polling.
Startup time should also be a bit faster.
And there will be explicit
concurrency exposed in the Java APIs.
Also,
we're really excited about this one.
The class data sharing implementation
from Apple has been adopted by Sun,
and it will be available on all
of their platforms in Java 1.5.
They've not only taken our source,
but they've also optimized it themselves.
And so what you will be seeing
will be improvements to our
initial sharing implementation.
Finally,
there will be a new tools interface,
which will be replacing the
debugger and profiler interface
that have been deprecated.
So Java 1.5 is available for you today.
It is equivalent to the beta 2 version
that is presently being previewed by Sun.
It installs on your
Tiger Preview DVD that you got
at the conference this week,
and you can go ahead and download
it from connect.apple.com.
So today's talk will be
divided into three parts.
First, Roger Hoover will be discussing
what is new in Java 1.5.
The second part,
I will be discussing how the
Hotspot Virtual Machine optimizes
your application.
And then finally,
Christy Warren will be introducing a
very exciting new Mac OS X application
for profiling your Java applications.
So here's Roger.
Hello.
I'm going to give you a brief
overview of the new and pretty
exciting things that are in 1.5.
I was over at Java 1
a little bit earlier,
and they've got whole talks
for each of my slides.
So this is going to be very high level,
very quick, but I'm doing this to get you
interested in new things in 1.5
if you haven't seen them before,
and also to point you to where to
find more information about those
pieces that you're interested in.
So, biggest changes pretty much
in the history of Java.
There are lots of language changes,
and I'll go into those
in the coming slides.
There are also a bunch of
library and runtime changes,
which are also pretty interesting.
Note the blue bubble with
the JSR numbers in it.
This is the Java community process.
It has these Java specification
request numbers that correspond with
the specifications for this new stuff,
and if there's something you
want more information in,
remember the number in the blue bubble.
And you'll be able to look it up with
the URL that I'll have at the end.
Okay.
Why change the language?
Well, there are some great things in here
that I think are going to give a lot of
improvements in programmer productivity.
Most of these changes
are handled by Java C,
but there are a few
things that touch the VM.
There's a flag-source 1.5 for
Java C that turns these things on.
It was not the default in earlier betas,
but with beta 2,
the stuff that we're giving you,
it is the default.
There's a new keyword called enum.
If you used enum as an identifier
in the past in your old code,
you're going to have to say -source
1.4 to turn off these things in
order to compile your old code.
Okay.
Let's look at some of
these great features.
The first one is auto-boxing
and auto-unboxing.
Well, what's boxing?
Consider a primitive type like
int or boolean to be an unboxed
type and capital integer and
capital boolean to be a box type.
Namely, the primitive object is
inside an object box.
So with 1.4,
if you used the box types and
the unboxed types together,
you had to do lots of conversions.
In this example here,
I show you are all the time creating
the new containers for things.
With 1.5, the compiler does this for you.
It type checks it,
codes much more readable, simple.
This is excellent for anybody
dealing with these things.
Generics.
People have talked about doing
generic types for a while in Java.
It's finally here.
Before you had the dilemma in Java of
either writing a very general type using
object and then having to do all these
casts in and out and worrying about
doing the type checking or having runtime
cast exceptions when you did it wrong,
or you could make something very
specific and not be able to reuse them.
Now you can write the code with
parameters for the types that are
embedded in the data type and get
the reusability and get the safe
type checking from the compiler,
which then generates the cast.
This is for object types only.
You can't use primitive
types as the parameters.
Here's an example, a pair that takes an
arbitrary left and right type,
capital L, capital R,
a constructor for that.
And public accessor
functions for looking inside.
And then at the bottom two lines,
the next to last line has a
place where we've created,
we're creating a new pair
of capital integer string.
And note that the 17 in that line there
is going to be auto-boxed for you,
so these features interact.
And also a teaser at the last line there,
we can now do C-style printing,
and I'll get to that in a minute.
But there's where we're
calling the accessor functions
to pull the values out.
Those of you who know C++,
here's equivalent code that does
exactly the same thing in C++.
The major difference is that C++
compilers typically instantiate
the template for every instance,
and thus you can use primitive types,
and you can't do that in Java.
So here we're using Int and Care Star.
Okay, another feature, static import.
Why static import?
Well,
there's two reasons why you'd want this.
One reason is that it eliminates
a binary compatibility issue with
importing an entire interface.
You're just pulling out the static
methods and fields of another class,
and so it's simpler for the compiler.
But probably the main reason
that you want to use this
is it simplifies the naming,
because you can actually import those
names into the current namespace.
So in 1.4, if you were going to use this
MyMath class that has this
constant pi and this method times,
you have to be saying MyMath.this
and MyMath.that all the time.
But in 1.5, if you do an import static,
you can use pi and times
without qualification.
So simpler code.
Compiler does all the work.
to make it right.
For loop has been enhanced.
Instead of having to specify the
induction variable in the loop,
if you're using arrays or a
new Java lang iterable type,
you can simply say for
type variable colon
Well, here's an example of a string
concatenation in the old method.
Here's what you can write now.
You simply name the variable that
represents each iteration of the array,
the piece of data you're interested in,
and you can use it in the loop.
Again, simpler code,
compiler does the work for you.
I showed you the printf example before.
This is enabled by
variable-arity methods.
You can do this.
Here's an example.
You can say type name dot dot
dot in a method definition,
and the compiler automatically
converts that into an array.
So you simply use it as an array.
This function here just
concatenates-- or no,
it chooses a maximum of a bunch
of strings that you give it.
But you could pass any
number of strings to it.
Enumerations.
This is similar to the enum type in C.
You specify a bunch of constants that
get instantiated by the compiler.
And you can use it as such by saying,
in this case, myColor.yellow picks
out an individual one.
But this also interacts
with static import.
And if you import this stuff,
you can actually just
talk about yellow and red.
But there's a lot more to enumerations
than simply a list of constants.
You can actually have
methods inside enumerations.
Here's an example of where I've taken the
color and defined another enumeration,
fruit,
which has a method that does a switch on
the type of fruit and returns the color.
Now,
note that we were able to say red and
yellow because we did a static import.
The third one, orange,
is actually both a fruit and a color.
And if I add a color,
it's a color that's actually
a color that's actually a
color that's actually a color.
And if I had just said orange
there instead of myColor.orange,
the compiler would have complained
that that was ambiguous.
So we can go on and in another
file import both color and fruit
and do computations on them.
Here I'm doing apple.myColor.
That'll return the color of an apple.
And because the compiler keeps
these things as unique instances,
you can do equal equal
on enumeration types.
and it gives you equality.
Okay, another big thing is metadata.
This is currently not hooked in with the
metadata stuff you heard about yesterday,
Spotlight, although we'd love to do that
at some point in the future.
But this is metadata inside the
Java program that allows you to add
additional information into your program.
And there are three parts
in order to make this work.
There are declarations,
there are annotations, which, well,
declarations say what you're
going to keep track of.
Annotations say where you use that and
you instantiate that inside the program.
And then runtime access,
you can write programs that actually
look at this metadata via reflection.
And the good thing about this is that
it eliminates the encoding of data into
flag classes like Jack's RPC stuff did.
Just to indicate that these
are special functions.
You can do this more
cleanly with metadata.
It doesn't have the compiler implications
of being dependent upon other classes.
And this will be used for programming,
documentation, tools.
I suspect we'll see a lot of
neat stuff that uses metadata.
So how does it work?
A metadata declaration is similar
to an interface declaration,
except you say @interface
instead of interface.
So you can give a bunch of members
value is going to be special,
and I'll talk about that in a minute.
And you can give default values.
So here's an example.
We've got a bunch of bugs in our code.
And so we define metadata called fixme.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so once we have the declaration,
then we need an annotation
in order to place this,
and we can place the annotations before
any declaration in our Java program.
There's a special way with a file that
we can put a package annotation because
Java really doesn't have a declaration
of a package that's explicit in code.
And we can also put these
in front of enum constants.
So what do they look like?
Well, here's several in a piece of code.
I've got this class
called perpetual motion,
and you'll note that the thing is
preceded by a fix-me annotation
that says there's no such thing,
and you get a holiday if you fix it.
Well, inside we have a method sum that
also has a fix-me annotation,
and this time I just have a string.
Why does sum subtract?
Well,
If you don't specify a member name,
it assumes value.
That's what's special about value.
And I didn't have to say what the reward
was because there's a default on that.
It'll use "cookie" as the default reward.
And finally, notice the debug annotation
in the last line.
And since debug has no members,
I don't have to do the open/close parens,
so I can just simply and cleanly
put those where I need them.
Okay, so how do I use these things?
Well, I can write tools that actually
look at the source to use these
because it just gets compiled out.
But I can also look at them
at runtime via reflection.
And there's another special annotation
called @retention that is used to tell
the compiler to retain that and put it in
the class file so reflection can find it.
So in my previous definition
or declaration of fixme,
if I had said @retention blah, blah,
blah, it would remember this
stuff for runtime access.
And in this example,
I'm using reflection to get at the
method that corresponds with sum,
and I do a .get annotation.
So that gives me back an
array of these annotations,
and then I use the enhanced for loop
just to print them out on the screen.
So this is how you'd write tools
to use the metadata information.
Great things for people who
write concurrent programs
with multiple threads.
There are some new classes.
I'm going to kind of
look at these inside out.
The Java Udall Concurrent Atomic does
single access atomic on individual
variables that's exposed in this API.
On top of that,
there's locks that are built on those.
Those are completely independent
of Java internal synchronization.
Then there's Java Udall Current that
has a bunch of classes that are pretty
useful that's built on all of this.
This was done through
JSR by Doug Lee and company,
some of you know of.
Here's a brief overview of
some of the things you can do.
In threads,
there's an executor interface.
It gives you fairly convenient thread
pools without doing lots of work.
There are lots of
different kinds of queues.
There's nano time for nanosecond
clock time within a given JVM,
which performance people
are going to love.
Lots of synchronization
primitives that more match the
literature than what's in Java,
so you can implement
published algorithms easier,
and concurrent access to
various kinds of collections.
This is great stuff.
Also,
in terms of multi-threaded programming,
a new Java memory model.
It says what to expect with
multiple threaded program
accessing shared storage.
There's a specification in the
original thread specification for
Java that was widely ignored because
it says you can't do things that were
widely done by optimizing compilers,
as well as processors like the
PowerPC that reorder instructions.
What this does is it presents
a realistic model of what can
happen before other things.
It also guarantees that when you build
a new object that the final fields
are set when you exit the constructor,
so you don't see an
intermediate state there.
Practically speaking,
what does this mean?
Well, we're going to make the Apple 1.5
JVM obey the Java memory model,
so you'll be able to count on it.
And in particular, you really have to use
synchronization any time you're
mucking with shared storage.
Either the Java synchronizer
or the Java virtual machine.
You can use the same thing,
but you really have to
use synchronization.
Also, if you're doing a multi-threaded
thing where one thread sets up a
bunch of data and then a bunch of
other threads take off and start
working on it when everything's done,
that variable that says that
things are done has to be volatile,
where the write of that volatile
by one thread releases all of the
things that were done before it.
And the read of that volatile in the
other threads acquires all of that stuff.
This is the way it works.
This is the standard way you
should use thread communication
via shared variables.
They've got to be volatile.
Otherwise, don't be surprised if
things happen out of order.
In particular,
things that you've tested and
debugged on a multiprocessor G4 are
most likely going to fail at some
point when you run them on a G5
if you haven't followed the rules.
There's a new tool interface
that replaces JVMPI and DI,
which are now deprecated and going away,
presumably in the next version of Java.
This has a slew of--
functionality that lets
you implement these tools,
plus hopefully a whole lot more.
Basically,
agents plug into the JVM -- these are
C++ programs or at least a piece of
your program -- that say which callbacks
they want to get and then are notified,
and there's also a whole bunch of
functions that they can query the VM.
So it will be exciting to see what comes
of that in the coming months and years.
There's a new monitoring and management
interface that's basically designed
so you can do things like load
balancing in server environments.
You can look at the memory
usage in classes and thread
information inside the JVM.
You can look at number of processors,
CPU utilization in the OS,
things like that.
And finally,
there's lots more things that
I don't have time to talk about.
Here's a list of some more things
that you may be interested in,
and note the last two lines, the URLs,
the next to last line,
fill in the JSR number and
you'll find out where to get the
specs for that particular JSR,
and the Sun site, the last line,
also has some great information.
Thank you, Roger.
So I will be going over some
implementation details of
the Hotspot Virtual Machine.
That should give you a better idea of how
your application can be better optimized
when running specifically on Mac OS X.
So what do you get with the
Hotspot Java Virtual Machine?
You get a client-just-in-time compiler,
a variety of garbage
collection algorithms,
automatic G5 optimization,
and the sharing of class data
between JVM instances when you
have multiple Java applications
running on the same machine.
You also get the tuned JRE implementation
that we have done for Mac OS X.
So let's talk a little
about the client compiler.
The Client Compiler dynamically
compiles your application's hot methods.
After you've called a particular
method a certain amount of times,
we go ahead and stop executing in the
interpreter and continue execution in
a JIT-compiled version of that method.
We have personally optimized the
client compiler from Sun for PowerPC.
That means that we've come up
with optimal code sequences
for each Java bytecode,
and we've also figured out
how to make best use of the
full PowerPC register set.
[Transcript missing]
So what exactly is inlining?
It's pretty straightforward.
In the example I have up on the slides,
you got average, it calls sum.
There's extra overhead of
actually calling the function sum.
So ideally,
you would want to have a situation
where the body of sum is just inlined
right into the body of average.
You don't want to have to
do that in your own code,
because the code is not as extensible.
So we do it for you dynamically.
In what situations can we do it?
Well,
there's a few opportunities that are very
straightforward to be able to do this.
One, our field accessor methods.
There's no reason for you to access
directly fields via their names.
You can use methods to do that.
And also,
constructors in your Java classes.
We're also able to inline
a bunch of intrinsics.
Intrinsic methods are methods that
we don't even need to look at the
implementation of the bytecodes.
We know what the behavior
of that method is,
and we go ahead and execute it in the
optimal PowerPC code sequence for those.
We know how to do array copy.
So this basically applies to JDK classes.
And we keep on adding methods as
they become either possible to come
up with an optimal code sequence or
they're used more heavily in the JDK.
and there's examples of a
bunch of intrinsic methods.
Well, this doesn't include a huge
set of methods that are
used in your applications,
and that's--
virtual methods.
As I said before,
it is possible that the target of an
invoke virtual bytecode is actually
not always the exact same method.
It depends on what variety of
implementations of those virtual
methods have actually been loaded.
But it turns out that we actually are
able to inline those if we know that
there has only been one implementation of
that virtual method that has been loaded,
in which case that method can
be considered monomorphic.
It turns out that in most usage patterns,
this is actually the case.
So we're actually hitting a
large percentage of invoke
virtuals with this optimization.
There are, however, limitations to this.
Since we're able to
inline so many methods,
the limiting factor no longer becomes
finding opportunities to inline,
but actually the size
of the compiled method.
So if your hot method
happens to be really large,
it might not be able to
inline methods that it calls,
or it might not be able to
be inlined by its callers.
You also need to be aware of the fact
that we are unable to inline methods
that are synchronized and also methods
that are with exception handlers.
There's a limitation
in the client compiler.
And I want to leave you with the tip
that in previous versions of Java,
it was necessary or it was useful to
use the final keyword to basically
to make a virtual method in-lineable.
And now that's not needed at all.
And you should basically be using final
only for its object-oriented purpose.
Okay, safe point polling.
There's a new feature in the
client compiler in Hotspot 1.5.
What is a safe point?
A safe point is the state that
a Java thread needs to reach
for exact garbage collection.
Specifically,
the location of all Java objects
needs to be known at that location.
Currently, compiled methods reach a safe
point in Java 1.4.2 as follows.
Basically, you have a Java thread
executing through compiled code,
and the virtual machine has
to hard suspend that thread,
make a copy of the code,
and then insert traps at
pre-designated locations,
and then continue executing at
the previous location in the copy.
You actually hit one of the traps,
at which point the virtual
machine can take over,
and it's known that it's at a safe point.
The fact that we're hard
suspending the threads makes
this possibly a dangerous thing,
and it also requires a lot of
extra overhead in the client
compiler to keep track of the
locations to insert traps at.
This is now greatly simplified in 1.5.
What we're doing in 1.5 is
basically you have your compiled
method that is currently executing
through all the instructions,
and every once in a while,
there is an access to a safe point page
in memory that basically is a no-op.
It's not reading or writing
anything that's actually useful.
But at some point,
the virtual machine decides
to memory protect that page,
and so the next time you
come around to that access,
it actually hits a trap,
and the virtual machine
is able to take over.
This will result in much
more optimal -- basically,
the overhead taken for your compiled
methods to be able to get to in a state
for garbage collection will be greatly
improved in Java 1.5 because of this.
Thank you.
Okay, let's talk a little about
garbage collection in Hotspot.
Right now,
we're currently supporting three
different garbage collection algorithms.
They're each designed to meet needs
of different kinds of applications.
There is no longer this notion of one
garbage collector to meet all needs.
So, the original garbage collector,
the Sierra garbage collector
that you're familiar with
from Hotspot since Java 1.2,
or even before then,
is still there and it still
is the default collector.
But since Java 1.4,
there have been two garbage
collection algorithms introduced.
First, there's the concurrent
mark-and-sweep algorithm,
which has been designed to have a
higher throughput for larger Java heaps.
And there's also the
parallel scavenge algorithm,
which is designed to have
a shorter pause time.
What I recommend to you is to run your
application with all three and also
change the Java heap parameters to see
where you can fine-tune your application.
There is not one garbage collection
algorithm that will apply to everybody.
There are a few small changes to garbage
collection happening in Java 1.5.
The main thing is that the
parallel scavenge collector
will now be the default in all
Mac OS X server installations.
This is similar to Sun's
approach at garbage collection
configurations for Java 1.5.
They're also making it so that
all server installations will
automatically get the parallel GC.
And we're applying that as well.
The way they detect that is any
dual CPU machine with greater
than 2 gigabytes memory gets
classified as a server machine.
Therefore, it should get the parallel
garbage collector.
This will definitely be very
good for compatibility between
various installations of Java 1.5.
We don't necessarily want all of a sudden
the performance characteristics to be
different just because you didn't happen
to get parallel scavenge on our platform.
The other set of differences in
Java 1.5 is the fact that we're
making it more convenient to you.
to configure the heap parameters
for performance purposes in each
garbage collection algorithm.
Specifically, in parallel scavenge,
you can now designate a percentage
of time that you hope that your
application is spent during GC.
Under the covers,
that gets translated to particular
heap sizes of the permanent generation,
the new size.
Basically, in the past,
you had to kind of know how these garbage
collection algorithms were implemented.
And now, the goal is to abstract
that away for you.
If you've been using use
adaptive size policy in Java 1.4,
that also has a few convenience features.
That also has a few convenience flags.
Specifically,
you can specify how long you want a
pause to take and also what ratio of
the time of your full Java application
is spent doing garbage collection.
Finally, I want to talk about how we've
optimized Java for the G5.
These optimizations that we've done on
the G5 require absolutely no code changes
on your part and also no recompilation.
Basically,
what we've done is we've taken full
advantage of the double-word registers
available on the G5 and also all
of the double-word instructions.
This has been done both to the
hotspot interpreter and the compiler,
and there should be big gains overall,
but especially those people who
are doing arithmetic of longs,
doubles, and floats will see a
substantial improvement.
There are specific reasons why.
I mean, we can do CAS inline
from float to integer.
We're also -- bit extractions
from those values are much faster,
and also the square root instruction
is actually available on the G5,
and we actually call directly into that
instead of writing source for that.
As you can imagine, that's much faster.
Also, synchronization has been improved
by taking advantage of the extra
lightweight synchronization
instruction available on the G5.
And so we are taking full advantage
of all of the PowerPC instructions
for synchronization.
How have we actually been able
to measure that performance gain?
Well, we've been tracking SCIMARC 2.0.
SCIMARC 2.0 is a very good example
of a few scientific algorithms.
It does fast Fourier transform.
It does the Monte Carlo approximation.
And you might be familiar with the
composite score numbers from the
Java State of the Union yesterday.
But there are a few points that I want to
point out that are different from that.
But as you can see, these are our scores
on a 1.25 gigahertz G4.
The 98 number is definitely pretty low.
And our goal with the G5 is
definitely to get the number up.
We expect it at least twice as fast.
The second bar is basically
a pretend 2.5 gigahertz G5,
just twice as fast.
The scores are twice as
high as the first numbers.
What we actually get on the G5 are
something that's substantially larger.
And we're pretty excited about that.
This makes the composite score is now
very competitive with scores reported
on Pentium and other platforms.
And we're very excited about that.
The one thing I do want to point out is,
for example,
why Monte Carlo is still low.
It turns out that Monte Carlo is doing
unnecessary synchronization by attaching
synchronize to the front of a method.
You remove that,
and the score increases dramatically.
It does increase dramatically
on the G4 as well.
The reason I want to point that out
is that the client compiler is unable
to detect unnecessary synchronization.
And it therefore falls into the hands
of the Java developer to do analysis
on their application to see if this
could be the case in your application.
And that's it.
And I'd like to invite Christy
to introduce Shark for Java.
Hi, everyone.
I hope you're having a
good afternoon today.
I'm here to talk about Shark for
Java and high-level performance analysis.
How many of you have heard
of Shark or used Shark?
Wow, I didn't expect quite that many,
so you know about this program.
But now we're going to show it for Java.
So I'm going to go through
this part pretty quickly then.
So Shark is basically the ultimate
profiler you can get on Mac OS X.
It's a really neat program.
In the past,
it's been great for analyzing our
C and C++ and Objective-C programs.
It does both what's called
cost and use analysis.
I'll go into that a little more later.
It can profile a running process,
a thread, or even the entire system.
And for Java, you know,
it's limited to just a single process.
But it can do time samples, you know,
like other profilers do.
But it does some things that
we used to be able to do in
the old sampler programs,
such as allocation tracing
and even exact method tracing.
So it can act like Gprof and record
every invocation of a method.
So these two other methods are
really nice additions to the
usual time profiling you see.
on other profilers.
It also does non-Java profiling,
as I mentioned, for time, memory,
function, even low-level hardware events.
If your application is
a real-time type thing,
you can use that.
And it's useful to study JNI calls.
And you can download this
beta from developer.apple.com.
And please get that,
because the version of Shark on your
Tiger CD does not have the Java support.
We worked really hard in the
last few weeks to deliver
this for you guys for WWDC,
so I hope you enjoy it.
But you have to get it off the website.
The good news is it runs
on both Panther and Tiger.
You know,
so you can just take this back to
your development system as it is,
use it, and just rock with it.
It's awesome.
So some key features of Shark is it
provides a profile view that gives you a
simultaneous heavy and tree perspective.
And that will become more
clear when I show you the demo.
And we're also introducing with Shark 4
sophisticated data mining and filtering.
We also provide a chart view
that lets you visualize the
execution of your program.
And especially for
enterprise applications,
this is a really neat feature.
You can do remote
profiling over a network.
You run a command line tool on your
X serve sitting in a cage somewhere.
You can talk to it to Shark for
your rendezvous and control it.
So you have minimal
impact on your server.
You can analyze Tomcat, your JSPs,
whatever.
So that's a really neat thing.
And you learn more about the
detailed features of Shark at
Got Shark this Friday at 3:30 PM.
So I'm going to talk about just
a few general principles here
to motivate the data mining.
What makes software slow?
Well,
probably best known as bad algorithms.
You're using a bubble sort
instead of a quick sort.
You know, if you use a large set of data,
then your software is
going to go really slow.
Excessive memory allocations and locking,
these are primitives that are expensive.
Victor just talked about this
example with Monte Carlo,
where the overuse of a synchronization
primitive just hosed performance.
Disk IO, network call, IPC,
these are all really expensive
operations compared to doing an ad.
These things you want to
do as little as possible.
Now, a more insidious thing that
happens in software is doing the
same operation more than once.
Let's suppose I write a module
that quick sorts properties
that I read out of a file.
And let's say Victor had written another
function that does the same quick sort.
These two will just show up as
calls to quick sort in the profile,
but it won't show the fact that
two different pieces of the code in
two different parts of the program,
you know, did this call to quick sort.
And this is a simple example of
what we call complexity in software.
You know, I have a little graph of an
execution trace here of a program.
The horizontal axis is time
slices or sample slices.
In this case, it's memory allocations.
The vertical axis is
the call stack depth.
So what we're really
doing is we're taking,
like, slices of your program
as it's running and,
you know, doing this plot.
And you can see these
interesting patterns there.
And I'll go into that a
little more in a minute.
So what do we mean by complexity?
Large-scale software has
multiple layers and many modules.
And the bigger the system,
the more of these things you get.
And because we're good programmers,
we hide the implementation
details from our clients.
So a method called foo could do something
like just set a bit in a class somewhere.
Or it could cause a
transaction to a database,
update some rows, and even result in the
launch of a rocket.
Through some I/O devices.
One takes microseconds or milliseconds.
The other one can take minutes or hours.
So innocuous-looking
calls can result in crazy,
complex, unexpected execution paths.
So going back to this example,
which is actually the
finder get-info dialog,
we zoom in.
And the patterns of repetition
show up in deeper levels.
On this find level,
you see repeated structure.
And as you're zooming out,
it shows up again.
This is like two layers that
are both doing iterative--
iteration and repetition.
And they're layered.
Now imagine this multiplied
with five layers.
Imagine you're adding AWT,
all the Sun libraries,
all of your libraries.
You're a huge application.
This thing can be insane.
So how do we deal with this?
Well, in analyzing performance,
you can break the impact of
an operation into two pieces.
The cost of the operation times
the number of places it's used.
And traditional profilers,
for a long time,
have made it easy to analyze costs.
And I can tell what leaf function I'm in.
The hard part is understanding
the patterns of usage.
Did Victor and I unintentionally
both quicksort the same array when
we could have just done it once and
one of us accessed a cached copy?
And when you introduce
over-modularization,
people tend to over-abstract,
design too much,
go kind of crazy with design.
You get these really crazy
multi-level call stacks,
multi-level things that just
really kill performance.
performance.
So, analyzing use.
Shark provides two classes of
features to help you analyze usage.
The first one is called
call stack data mining.
And in this case,
what you do is you want to
filter unwanted information.
How many of you have profiled
something and not seen a line
of your code in the top profile?
Rather,
you've seen all these Java libraries,
system libraries.
Have any of you had that problem?
Yeah, I bet you have.
That was the first thing that
happened to me when I did a profile.
Now, the other side of this
is graphical analysis.
In this case,
you can visualize the dynamic
behavior of your program,
like those plots that I showed you.
Those are not just cute
graphs to make a point.
Those are data from real
program that I was able to use
to find performance problems.
And you do this through a technique
called software fingerprinting.
And in software fingerprinting,
you recognize that if the
pattern on the picture looks
the same over and over again,
it means you're going
through the same code path.
And if you're going
through the same code path,
you're either just doing the
same thing over and over again,
or you're iterating over some
array or other structure data.
And in that case,
you can still look at the
opportunity to hoist information.
In other words, in quicksort,
you have to do a compare function.
But suppose your compare operator
then has to go through a whole bunch
of different classes and call stacks,
and so to actually get down to where
it's doing the real A is less than B.
Well, that's not a good.
You should decapsulate that stuff,
and you remove the amount of
overhead to do that compare.
So the software fingerprinting can
also identify those kind of cases.
[Transcript missing]
So-- and focus package is the
same thing for all the functions
within a Pegler package.
So I'm just going to show
you this graphically,
because there's a lot to cover.
So in excluding library,
here we have an example of a main
program that calls an init function,
a do example, and a cleanup.
And do example, in this case,
calls the function bar four times.
And let's say it uses Java util.
And it uses a hash table.
So in this case, when you profile it,
you're just going to
see all these samples,
as indicated in yellow,
in Java util and not in bar.
So we don't know that we've
been using bar to do this.
But by excluding,
it turns bar effectively
into a leaf function.
And now you can see, well,
I'm making four calls to bar.
Well,
if they're computing the same thing,
I don't need to do that.
If they are, I can hoist.
Now there's another operation
that's very similar to exclude
library called flattening a library.
And that is, makes the library go away.
But instead of making it go away
all the way to the end of the tree,
it makes the library go away.
And that's because it's not
going to be able to do it.
So you can see that the library
is now going to be able to do it.
And if you want to do it completely,
it replaces the library with
all of the entry points into it.
So you can observe your usage of
the library in that situation.
And finally, focusing.
We want to focus on do example.
It makes main, init, and cleanup go away.
And you're just left with this subtree.
Okay, thank you.
So we have a sort of modified version
of the Java 2D application here.
And to use--
You know, Java for Shark,
you add an XRUN parameter.
You use the JVMPI interface.
It'll migrate to JVMTI in the future.
And you add a dash XRUN shark argument.
So with that in mind, let's run this.
So you get a message in the console,
"Java for Shark is enabled."
And here is our familiar example.
We added a new pane here
called Bouncing Strings.
And this is kind of a cooked example in
that it has some performance problems
introduced that we want to go find.
So let's go over and launch Shark.
And Shark has all sorts of traces,
but we're going to choose, for now,
Java Time Trace.
And when it does so,
you can pick the Java application.
In this case,
we ran it from a command line type shell,
so you just see Java.
It would see your application name
if you made it double clickable.
So let's just start sampling.
Oh, by the way,
you notice that it just paused?
It does that every so often.
And it's because we're
garbage collecting.
You see it just did it again.
So that's kind of odd.
So let's just start sampling.
So just let it go for a few seconds.
You know, given the sampling rate,
it's probably good to
sample for about 10 seconds.
And let's stop sampling.
and we now have a typical profile view.
We have a list of the various
symbols and the percentage of
samples that occurred in them.
On the right here,
you'll see a backtrace of the calls.
So you see doString, drawString,
and it goes down to
bouncing strings paint.
If you click on another symbol,
you'll see its backtrace.
And one thing to kind of help keep
track of things a little better,
there's a neat feature
called color by library.
So if you click on that,
look what happens.
It colors all the strings.
And this will help us
identify everything.
AWT is colored in this red color,
brown for this, and so on.
And one little problem here.
The Java runtime in JVMPI isn't perfect
about reporting all the symbols,
so we have a method
with an unknown library.
So we're going to use the exclude library
to get rid of that and attribute those
to things that are more meaningful.
And when this happens,
you'll see that these
percentages went up.
Paint strings went up,
native font wrapper went up, and so on.
If we look at native font wrapper,
we can exclude the library again.
and now it pushes initialized font up.
And this is kind of interesting.
Initialized font, instead of drawing,
we're drawing, we're painting strings.
Why are we initializing a font?
And this is taking up almost as much
time as it's taking to draw the string.
So let's take a look at
the heavy and tree view.
And we've been looking
kind of from the bottom up.
We've been looking at the
leaves of the execution tree.
Now we can look from top down.
Here's our event dispatch thread run,
and it works its way down.
And here's bouncing strings paint.
So we see that this bouncing strings
paint is an important place to look at.
And here is one of the really
cool features that we worked
hard to get in for you guys.
You can double-click on bouncing
strings paint and get source.
And in source here,
it's annotated by the relative
densities of the calls.
So about 9% of the time
is spent in fill-rect,
and 89% is spent in this
paint-strings function.
And you notice that these
things are underlined.
Well,
that means you can double-click on it
and navigate to the associated function.
And it's like a little web browser.
You have a backwards and a forward arrow.
And you see here,
there's three areas of interest.
And we found, oh,
that looks like a problem.
We're calling set font new font Lucida.
So we're constructing a font
every time we're painting,
actually inside of a for loop.
That's pretty bad.
So let's go fix that.
And yeah,
we kind of rigged this a little bit,
but I've made errors
like this in programs,
and I'm sure other people might have too.
So this is worth doing.
So I happen to have the corrected
code here just to save us time.
So I'm going to change those.
And also, let's quit the app.
And we're going to run again.
Give it a second to load.
And we go back to bouncing strings.
And look at that.
We just about doubled its speed.
So now, just by doing some analysis,
we are able to speed up our
program pretty significantly.
Now, let's do one more trace.
Since we're feeling lucky,
we made some progress,
let's see if we can make some more.
So I'm going to do a memory trace,
because this is a different
kind of technique than you
might be familiar with.
So we're going to do start.
and the memory trace slows it
down a little bit because we're
sampling every memory allocation.
And let's stop that.
And now we see, wow,
69% of our allocations
occur in component bounds.
and we change this to value,
we can see that just in those few seconds
we allocated half a megabyte of memory.
No wonder we were garbage
collecting so much.
We were allocating all
these bounds objects.
So let's look at what's up with that.
So if you look in the back trace here,
you'll see that bouncing strings
ball tick is doing most of it.
And we go in here and you see that
we have this bounds equals get bounds
that's being called in every tick.
Now I've already got code in here
to turn that off and cache it,
which would be the obvious thing.
Just compute it once since the
window size doesn't change.
So let's go ahead and make that change.
We made a convenient little
Boolean here called cache bounds.
And by the way,
this is not a cooked up example.
This was something that
we found in the program,
just as it was given to me.
So we're going to do that.
We're going to run it again.
Go to Bouncing Strings.
And look at that.
We're now at about 183, 190.
I've seen this thing go over 200.
So just doing simple
memory optimizations,
because memory allocation
is so expensive in Java,
can get you huge wins.
I was working on an application server
a few years ago where we reduced
the number of allocations by 10x,
and we got a 3x throughput
improvement in that server.
So doing just memory analysis and memory
reduction is a really amazing technique.
So thank you very much.
I'm going to give this back to Victor.
Thank you, Christy.
So I just wanted to conclude
with one recommendation.
For optimizing for Hotspot,
the main thing you need to know is
exactly what your HOT methods are.
You can find out bottlenecks
in your own code,
and you can identify them
using Shark for Java.
The other thing that you
need to be aware of is,
even if there's nothing more to be done,
you also need to make sure that the
HOT method is as amenable to Hotspot's
optimization opportunities as possible.
So I want to highlight the fact, again,
that inlining is probably one
of the biggest optimizations
that we're able to do.
And therefore,
it should be in your best interest
to make your HOT methods inlinable.
So here's the reminder of the key things
that keep a method from being inlined:
it being too large,
it being synchronized,
or it having exception handlers.
And the last tip I want to
tell you is that we do have a
Java lab here at WWC all week.
And if you want to see your
application running on a Mac and
you haven't done so before,
do go down there.
Or if there's any performance
bottlenecks that you want to
identify to our engineering,
definitely we're able to
do that there as well.
So that concludes everything.
I want to point out a few URLs.
You can get Java reference documentation
from Apple at the ADC website.
You can also get Java 1.5
documentation at the Sun website.
And finally,
that is the URL again for where you can
download Shark that has the Java support
that runs both on Panther and Tiger.
Finally, if you have any more questions,
the people to contact are Alan Samuel,
he's our Java Technologies Evangelist,
Bob Fraser, he's our Product Manager,
and finally Francois Jouel,
who is the Manager of
all things Java at Apple.